let the most dangerous thing in Led
Zeppelin's name and I will remind you
the other thing was Zeppelin now we've
heard a lot about lead over the last
year due to the horrific events in Flint
Michigan Flint's tap water was laced
with dangerous levels of lead the state
knew about it and did nothing there are
200 children under the age of six in
Flint with elevated blood levels 9,000
children have been exposed
yes Flint has become a city whose very
name evokes disaster like Benghazi or
Waco or Smurf Village never forget never
forget what happened there never forget
Flint was a perfect storm of
incompetence from start to finish and
the crisis began when the city switched
water sources a decision which was
commemorated thusly
it's a little weird to see people make a
toast as they essentially drink poison
yes under those circumstances you'd
usually expect to hear something like
I'll see you all in Hell or the mother
ship is coming and soon we will all
ascend that new water source corroded
the city's pipes and leach led into the
drinking water and with all the
bureaucratic cluster fury involved
politicians in Washington were lining up
to be vocally outraged we've got
children that have been harmed and yet
we're sitting here equivocating over
words that mayor mayor may not establish
blame the safety and well-being of our
citizens is not a Republican or a
Democrat or an independent issue it's a
human issue we're not some third-world
country where you get a hundred thousand
people who get poisoned poisoned for
long periods of time that's right
because there is only one poison that
thousands of Americans should consume
and that is Mountain Dew Code Red
holy Sh the most delicious way of
contracting Reds poisoning that is
horrific so we all care about led in
Flint now which is great unfortunately
the problem is not just in Flint a USA
Today Network report found lead
contamination in almost 2000 additional
water systems spanning all 50 states and
we can't just act like it's not there
the way we all pretend that the public
swimming pool is not 3% child you're in
that's generous by the way and if you're
thinking well what we should just rip
out every lead pipe in the country it's
not quite as easy as that there are an
estimated seven point three million lead
service lines around the country and we
don't even know where many of them are
and if we did a partial solution that
could increase rather than decrease lead
in water but perhaps more importantly
even if we did replace all lead pipes
that still wouldn't come close to
stopping lead poisoning as what led
activists reassuringly puts it kids are
not gonna get poisoned from a water
fountain at their school they're not
they're gonna get poisoned from paint in
their homes okay I like how that starts
off sounding reassuring will ends up
even more terrified it's like saying
look that boa constrictor isn't gonna
bite you it's not it's just not it's
gonna crush you to death with its body
and then swallow you whole because
that's what it does but she is right the
biggest threat of lead poisoning to
children does not come from water it
comes from ingesting lead paint dust
there are an estimated 2.1 million homes
all around the country that contain both
a lead dust hazard and a child under six
and the CDC estimates over half a
million children have elevated blood
lead levels and that's terrible ladies
almost as much of a scourge in young
children's homes as frozen merchandise
why do you need three Olaf's and a
singing Elsa Mackenzie let let it go go
hashtag let let it go go if you're
thinking at this point what what well
how how big a deal is a little LED dust
anyway it's a big deal
how potent is LED a child can be
poisoned by only 10 milligrams of pure
lead to give you an idea of what a small
amount that is this spoonful contains
about four thousand milligrams today we
know just ingesting small amounts of
lead dust can lead to brain damage and
even death
okay first maybe don't say death in that
jolly tone of voice over the photo of a
baby but but second in his true that
there is no safe level of lead it's one
of those things so dangerous you
shouldn't even let a little bit of it
inside you much like heroin or Jeremy
Piven even even low level exposure can
lead to irreversible damage like lower
IQs antisocial behavior and reduced
attention span and the dangers are so
severe that twenty years ago
Sesame Street even produced a video to
teach kids how to deal with lead in
their homes
I've had it who do you people think you
are anyway the lead police
it's a close call but as police songs go
the possibility of being poisoned by
lead is still less terrifying than every
breath you take every breath I take
you'll be watching me that's a crime
you're stalking me Gordon you're a
stalker that video was made 20 years ago
and it's enough to make you wonder well
if lead paint is so dangerous why the
is there still so much of it in
houses where kids live and that's a good
question many countries around the world
actually banned the use of lead paint in
the 1920s so we knew it was dangerous
but instead of joining them America
decided to put LED basically everywhere
humble that it's a naturally occurring
element not Meryl Streep's Oscar speech
and also if we're assigning personality
traits to metals why stop with humble
lead how about passionate zinc free
spirited copper and extremely racist tin
it wasn't just newsreels promoting Lent
the the lead industry reassured us it
was safe releasing things like this
coloring book inviting you to the Dutch
boys LED party which sounds like the
worst sex club in all of Amsterdam and
even when the government finally got
serious about banning LED in the 70s and
80s the LED industry did not go down
without a ridiculous fight here is the
head of a led industry trade group
pushing back against the evidence that
led was dangerous the fact of the matter
is if you look at a total national
profile we have never been healthier we
have never lived longer there must be
something that we're doing right what
he's basically saying it can't be bad I
turned out fine which is the number-one
argument made by people who did not turn
out fine it's like when your uncle says
hey I had my first beer at 10:00 and I
turned out okay but did your Uncle Stu
though because your dinner last night
was 23 croutons dipped in frosting and
that has not turned out fine behavior
make a change uncle and by the way there
was already plenty of hard evidence
showing that childhood led exposure was
harmful to in large part to a study by
this man dr. Herbert Needleman
in the late 1970s dr. Needleman studied
the baby teeth of healthy school
children in two Boston suburbs when we
looked at the data we found that
children who had highlander teeth but
who had never been identified as having
any problems with lead at lower IQ
scores poor language function and poor
your attention that's right it's time
you knew children there is no tooth
fairy your baby teeth were all taken
away by dr. Herbert's Needleman we told
you the fairy thing because we knew that
would creep you out but you should be
thanking that man because thanks to
studies like his America started
regulating and removing lead from our
environment in the 1970s resulting in a
graph of child blood lead levels in this
country that looks like this now lead
paint was banned here and leaded
gasoline was phased out all through here
so getting rid of lead in paint and gas
was a major public health victory you
know that 18-year old intern in your
office who thinks he's so damn smart
well he probably is because he was born
after America's lead epidemic you've got
lucky soy yet now go get my coffee
but even though we drastically cut back
on the amount of new let that we put
into the world we were still left with
all the lead that was already there in
our pipes and on our walls and while we
all agreed it was a problem the cost of
getting rid of it all was surprisingly
high in 2000 the estimated cost for
testing for and then totally removing
lead from old housing stock nationwide
was sixteen point six billion dollars
per year every year for the next decade
which is the sort of figure that turns
the government into parents with a sick
family dog hey I know we said we'd do
anything to make this better but we just
got an estimate from the vet and do you
know the name doggy heaven every meal is
hot dogs
don't you think bandit would like to go
live there I do I do and look nobody
expected the government to pick up that
full tab that same report even ran an
estimate of what it would cost if the
government used interim controls like
sealing lead paint in or periodic
cleanings and only did that in homes
where families with low incomes lived
and that cost came out to just two
hundred and thirty million dollars per
year which sounded lower and therefore
better unfortunately and amazingly we
have never funded it at that level for
instance the main program to abate lead
paint in housing HUDs
lead hazard control program has never
been appropriated funding above 176
million it's been steadily going down
since 2003 and this year we've allocated
just a hundred and ten million dollars
that is just a little more than
Americans spent to go see right along to
a movie which incidentally the New York
Post described us as funny as lead
poison it's amazing
and look that reduction is by no means
because we were done removing lead from
housing because remember there are still
millions of homes with lead paint
hazards in them and according to heart
they were only able to fund around half
the applications for lead abatement
grants they received last year meaning
many Americans still live in homes with
LED in them and sadly it is often the
group's least able to do anything about
it
people in the lower socio-economic
levels go into older housing less well
taken care of housing housing where
there may be absentee landlords and as a
result are more liable to have lead
paint that is not been abated has not
been taken off the walls of course and
if you are in that situation you
probably can't shop around for a new
apartment so most people with lead
problems are stuck in homes they can't
leave trying their best to avoid danger
which may sound familiar because it's
the plot of everything horror movie ever
made and the crazy thing is while LED
abatement is expensive it's cost
effective for instance some studies show
a correlation between decreasing LED
levels and a falling crime and when you
combine that with lower medical bills
and greater economic activity one study
found that each dollar spent on lead
paint hazard control would bring back at
least seventeen dollars in societal
benefits which is great although the
cost savings still do rank a distant
third on my list of reasons to not
poison children number one and two still
being it's poison and their
children and you would think that our
members of Congress would be on board
with doing more to fight lead poisoning
after all you remember how angry they
were about all those kids who got
poisoned in Flint right we've got
children that have been harmed it's a
human issue it's an American issue that
affects Americans lives we're not some
third-world country where you get a
hundred thousand people who get poisoned
poisoned they seem so concerned
concerned
which which is what which is what makes
it but that's what makes it so
frustrating that last year all of those
men voted for a bill that would have
reduced the already low funding for
Hoglund abatement programs by thirty
five million dollars amounting to a
thirty two percent cut and the truth is
if you cut funding like that a whole lot
more children might get poisoned
poisoned now the good news is those cuts
didn't go through the bad news is the
funding stayed flat and by the way the
other two primary agencies that work on
LEED related issues have had funding
problems in recent years as well which
makes no sense because I thought
poisoned children was something we were
all justifiably outraged by this problem
was obvious enough 20 years ago for
Sesame Street to feel the need to
address it and since we very much still
have this problem it's clearly time to
address it again I can't believe that it
has been two decades since Sesame Street
taught kids how to avoid lead dust you
two do not look like you've aged a day
oh very nice whoa wow you both look
great but unfortunately I'm here to say
a lot of places still contain lead paint
well it's a good question we need to
care more than we currently do so that
we spend enough money on containing it
oh that's nice what how much have you
got in there Elmo how much is it okay
that's a start no no no Elmo you did not
you didn't actually do it because
because we're gonna need a lot more of
that money probably hundreds of millions
of dollars every year I ma'am
we really do not have time for that but
but but the problem here is people are
worried that lead is too expensive a
problem to fix
that's ridiculous how can anyone say
it's too expensive huh aren't they aware
that according to a study in
Environmental Health Perspectives every
dollar we spend on lead paint hazard
control produces returns of at least
seventy to one Wow
that is an astonishing level of economic
insight coming from someone who lives in
a trash can the scan is rent-controlled
I've had it since the 60s okay no I know
it's cost-effective but people just
aren't willing to do it I guess it just
seems too hard
doesn't does make sense Elmo things do
tend to get done if you just decide you
want to do them can you think of another
example where that's true
you see you just have to have a vested
interest in the outcome and you'd be
amazed of what you can do rasca you take
your books guess my trash can is messy
people stop and they stare well that is
unsurprisingly negative Oscar but you
know what that's actually a fair
representation of our institutional
problems so there you go you mean I
helped you prove your point yes Oscar
you actually did lettuce they're all
around us our pipes our walls and our
hair we should do more to contain it
but first we all have to care
that's our show thank you sir